Notes

http://book.realworldhaskell.org/read/using-typeclasses.html

How do restrict the type of currency through the constructor.

Cons and [] are constructors.

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/More_on_datatypes

Infix value constructors must be prefixed with colon (:).

Difference between sublcassing and instance. 141-142

Question 1

Explain the difference between type constructors and value constructors.

Answer 1

A value constructor (RHS):
* specifies the values that a type can have (enum -> True, False or set 1..natural num).
* accepts parameters which defines the type that is returns (Float -> Float -> Float -> Shape)
* functions that return a value of a data type.
* runtime.
* or just constructor.

A type constructor (LHS):
* specifies the type a value can have.
* accepts type parameters which restrict the type constructor to a certain type (Int, Float, etc)
* they are a kind not a function.
* compile time.

Link type constructor and value constructor.

Question 2

Create a Haskell data type to represent currencies. Use record syntax. Include fields for the currency values and names, plus any other fields you like. Make sure you have at least two value constructors (eg. Aussie dollars and GBPs or notes and coins). Derive any relevant type classes (eg. Ord, Eq). Try to include an intermediate data type.

Question 3

Create a new data type to represent a currency supply (a collection of currencies and the number of units of each). Include a type parameter in your constructor representing the key that will be used to look up currencies in the supply (or some other type parameter if you prefer). The type should be able to hold units of multiple currency values (although only one currency type). Make the currency supply type an instance of least two type classes by hand. Add type synonyms to one or both of your data types where appropriate to improve readability.

Question 4

Create a cashDispenser function that takes a currency supply type and an amount to dispense, and returns a new currency supply with the amount withdrawn (optionally also return a second currency supply representing the amount withdrawn (ie: the number of units of each currency required to withdraw it); you could also return this instead of the currency supply with the amount withdrawn – choose your own adventure!). For simplicity, you can choose to only allow amounts to be withdrawn using a single currency (ie. dispenser cannot dispense $50 x 1 and $20 x 1 for $90, and $90 cannot be withdrawn in only $50 or $20, so a currency dispenser with a currency supply containing only these currency values could not dispense $90). Use the Either type to give different failure messages if the amount cannot be withdrawn.

Question 5

Create a currency supply that can only dispense 20 and 50 values of some currency type. Implement a binary search tree through which you can look up the currency supply combination to dispense when particular amounts are requested (ie: the tree node keys will be amounts and the values will be currency supplies). Include common amounts for up to 200 currency units in your tree (ie: 20, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110 ... 200). Create a new cashDispenser function that uses this tree to decide what currency supply combination to withdraw. Make sure some sort of failure still results if an amount cannot be dispensed.

Question 6

Using YesNo for inspiration, write a type class called Valuable that defines one function that returns an Int representing how valuable something is (on some arbitrary scale). Make your currency and currency supply types plus at least one standard Haskell data type instances of this type class. Use :k to check its kind and :info to check its instances.

Answers 6
NewType

class Valuable a where
  getValue :: a -> Int
  
instance Valuable [a] where
  getValue x = length x

Question 7

Make one of your data types an instance of Functor, or explain why you cannot do so.

Container of a to a container of b.

Matching the map with key and value (k,v) - page 99 in the book.
Maybe from just
Also page 129 key value type synonym
page 52 on matching ordinal